Two days after its release, last week's
video on the Epstein Files was on track
to become the most successful upload in
my channel's history. It had gained a
million views in 24 hours, outpacing my
previous record holder by nearly 40%.
The trajectory suggested that I had a
big hit on my hands. Then, a yellow
dollar sign appeared on my YouTube
dashboard, signaling that the video had
been demonetized. You'd expect that to
mean that I just stop earning ad revenue
from the video. But in practice, the
consequences are a bit more severe. When
a video is deemed inappropriate to run
ads on, the platform's incentive to
distribute that video evaporates. The
recommendation engine, which is designed
to maximize revenue for YouTube, quietly
shelves the content. Viewers can still
find it if they look for it, but for my
video, the view count immediately
flatlined. The platform provided no
specific reason for the decision, just a
statement that the video was not
advertiser friendly. Sometimes, I'm told
they'll tell you which precise moment in
the video was deemed offensive, and you
can then clip that section out. In this
case, it just says that after a human
review, which I requested, that there
are controversial issues throughout the
video, meaning that there's nothing I
can do to make it acceptable. When I go
through the video and look at YouTube's
policies, their decisions difficult to
understand. The content was a 37minute
analysis of the inconsistencies in the
Epstein files, specifically with regard
to FBI redactions that appeared to
violate the transparency law passed by
Congress. The video contained no
profanity, no violence, no descriptions
of Epstein's activities, and no
inappropriate imagery was shown on
screen. The audience metrics confirm
that the content was not offensive to
viewers. At the time of demonetization,
the video had accred 90,000 likes and
maintained a like to dislike ratio of
98.9%
which is an unusually high approval
ratio for a video and higher than on
most of my videos, implying that the
viewers, the very people advertisers
supposedly need protection from, found
the content acceptable and valuable. The
title, The Epstein Files Are Worse Than
You Think, was unambiguous, too. No
viewer clicked on it expecting a cooking
tutorial only to be ambushed by a
critique of the justice system.
>> Why do you have that this? He's my hero.
He's a chef. Jeffrey Epstein. This is
Anthony Bourdain.
>> No.
>> To understand why this happens on
YouTube, we need to look back to the
YouTube ad apocalypse. Years ago, after
Logan Paul's infamous vlog from a
Japanese forest triggered a massive
advertiser exodus, big brands paused
their YouTube advertising campaigns. It
was a simple commercial calculation.
They worried that appearing next to
offensive content like a Logan Paul
video might be misconstrued as an
endorsement or simply link their brand
to something awful in the viewer's mind.
YouTube responded by drastically
tightening its creator guidelines. If
you wanted to earn advertising money on
the platform, you couldn't behave like
Logan Paul. Now, I recognize that
YouTube is a for-profit business. As a
creator whose videos are often
sponsored, I'm also accustomed to
dealing with advertisers and fully
appreciate their concerns. Businesses
have a clear duty to protect their
brands and YouTube needs to organize the
platform to secure that revenue. This
arrangement benefits everyone.
Advertiser spending funds the whole
ecosystem. If a video is genuinely
hateful or dangerous, demonetization is
a logical business decision for YouTube
as it preserves free speech while
insulating advertisers from toxic
content. The problem is that this
mechanism has evolved into a blunt
instrument that penalizes serious
journalism under the guise of brand
safety. Advertisers routinely buy slots
on mainstream cable news programs that
discuss war, crime, and political
corruption. Yet, when an independent
creator examines these same topics with
equal rigor, the algorithm flags it as
being inappropriate.
The evidence suggests that we're not
dealing with a calculated conspiracy to
silence a specific controversial story,
but instead a broken system at YouTube.
I spoke with a friend who runs a much
larger channel than mine, who has
produced multiple videos on the same
topic and asked whether his Epstein
videos had been demonetized given that
two of my three uploads on the subject
have now been penalized. He reported no
issues, noting that he's careful to
avoid profanity and that he bleeps out
any sensitive terms. This is reassuring
as it implies that there's nothing
sinister at play. However, it reveals
that YouTube has an arbitrary system
where demonetization might depend less
on the subject matter and possibly more
on the algorithmic status of the
uploader. Of course, given the
platform's opacity, we can't know this
for sure. There has been some research
on how demonetization works on YouTube.
But before I get to that, let me tell
you quickly about today's video sponsor,
SY, an eim provider who makes it
incredibly easy to travel and stay
connected without having to pay
ridiculous foreign roaming charges, find
a local SIM card, or waste your time
constantly trying to find public Wi-Fi.
I hadn't heard of this technology before
trying out SY this summer, but it's an
app that you install on your phone,
which allows you to stay connected in
over 200 places around the world.
There's no need to buy and swap physical
SIM cards when you travel. You just
download the app once and use it
whenever you're abroad. You choose how
much data you want and for how long.
It's way cheaper than roaming and takes
seconds to set up. You just select the
country you're traveling to and activate
an eSIM before you leave home. When you
land, your phone automatically connects
to a local network with no hidden
charges. There's no fussing around at
the airport. You can book an Uber,
access GPS, or make a call. So, if
you've got travel plans, click the link
in the description or scan this QR code
to download the app. Then choose a plan
in the country you're going to and use
my code boil at checkout to get an
exclusive 15% discount. Researchers have
termed this problem censorship by proxy.
A 2022 study found that demonetization
effectively acts as a censor because it
creates a financial disincentive for
creators to cover risky topics. The
studies show that the algorithm favors
safe metrics like channel size and video
duration over the specific details of
the content. Creators essentially build
up trust with the algorithm and once
trusted are less likely to be
demonetized. This possibly explains why
my second Epstein video was demonetized
so quickly. The study also shows that
when the algorithm decides a topic is
unsafe, it restricts distribution,
making the content almost invisible to
all but the most dedicated subscribers
who seek out every new video. This
safety filter, as the authors note,
notoriously fails to grasp context. The
channel Vlogging Through History
documented this issue, reporting that
his educational videos on World War II
were demonetized simply for displaying a
2-cond clip of a flag from that period
or for discussing the September 11th
attacks. The algorithm groups Nick
Fuentes and a historian explaining an
important World War II battle into the
same category and then both face the
same penalty, the revenue cliff. For
this reason, creators sometimes feel
forced to modify their language to
survive. This has given rise to what's
known as algo speak, a surreal new
online dialect where creators replace
clinical terms with nonsense words,
saying unive instead of dead or PDF file
instead of pedophile, hoping to slip
past the automated filters. Serious
discourse then becomes a childish code,
degrading the quality of information in
exchange for algorithmic safety. In my
video, I use the correct terms because
it seems ridiculous to me to speak in a
code that my audience might not
understand and because we're discussing
a serious topic. I did bleep out any
words that might uh trigger the
algorithm. The algorithm nonetheless
responded by unaliving the video. This
type of suppression matters because the
format of online video offers something
that traditional media often can't.
Depth. A cable news segment frequently
lasts 4 minutes. A newspaper article
runs for around 700 words. My video was
37 minutes long and attempted to give a
balanced view of what had been revealed
by the government and why it matters.
This long- form format allows for a
detailed examination of complex
timelines such as the fact that Epstein
was first reported to the FBI in 1996 or
that his financial crimes date back to
the 1970s. It allows us to explore the
systemic failures of the FBI and the DOJ
that span multiple administrations
rather than reducing the story to a
partisan soundbite. When algorithms
penalize this type of depth and
discussion, they don't just hurt
creators, they harm public understanding
of complex topics. The released Epstein
files are heavily redacted, often in
ways that don't appear to comply with
the transparency law. These redactions
obscure the names of potential
co-conspirators while leaving victims
names exposed. Covering these dry
procedural details is essential for
holding power to account. Yet, it's
exactly this type of content that can be
judged non-advertiser friendly by the
algorithm, even if not by advertisers
like my video sponsors or my viewers.
This creates a bizarre paradox.
Mainstream news outlets in many parts of
the world are increasingly buckling
under financial and regulatory pressure.
It's not just about threats from the FCC
to strip broadcast licenses. It's about
the bottom line. We've seen networks pay
millions in settlements to politicians
to resolve legal disputes, effectively
paying for the right to operate. We saw
this quite clearly when Barry Weiss
recently sheld a fully vetted 60 Minutes
investigation into deportations because
she said that the White House had
refused to comment. As the correspondent
noted, if the government's refusal to
participate becomes a valid reason to
spike a story, we've effectively handed
them a kill switch for any reporting
they might find inconvenient.
Simultaneously, corporate consolidation
has become a point of political
leverage. The Warner Brothers Discovery
merger remains stalled in regulatory
limbo with the administration signaling
that approval hinges on correcting the
editorial stance of its news division
CNN. For media conglomerates burdened by
massive debt, this creates an
existential dilemma. They can maintain
their journalistic independence or they
can secure the regulatory approval they
need to survive. Increasing numbers are
choosing survival. The independent
creators who fill the gap fare no
better. The United States has recently
fallen to 57th out of 180 countries when
ranked for press freedom. It's seemingly
easier for politicians to coersse the
few remaining broadcast giants than to
go after millions of independent
bloggers, podcasters, and YouTubers.
Yet, if the primary platform for
independent video journalism effectively
taxes serious reporting by removing its
revenue and its reach, that ranking will
likely slide even lower. YouTube is not
merely an American platform. It has
global reach. In countries with strict
state censorship, citizens often rely on
VPNs to access YouTube as one of the few
windows into the unfiltered world. If
the platform itself begins to sanitize
content to appease Western politicians
or advertisers, it inadvertently aligns
itself with the goals of those
restrictive regimes. By disincentivizing
the coverage of serious topics, YouTube
shuts off the escape valve for global
information, homogenizing the internet
into a safe, corporatefriendly feed that
challenges no one. There's a distinct
irony to digital censorship, the
Stryisand effect. Attempts to suppress
information often make it more popular.
After I posted a community update
explaining that my video had been
demonetized, thousands of viewers
watched the video specifically because
it had been flagged. The like to dislike
ratio went even higher and many new
viewers subscribed to the channel.
Viewers understand that in an era of
algorithmic curation, the unsafe label
is sometimes a proxy for important.
Similarly, the 60 Minutes episode that
had been shelfd by Barry Weiss had
already been broadcast in Canada.
Canadian viewers uploaded it to the
internet and it quickly went viral
online as viewers rushed to see the
episode that they had not been allowed
to see. It's crucial to distinguish
between the politics of this case and
the morality of it. My critique of the
decline in press freedom under the
current administration should not be
misconstrued as a partisan attack. The
failure to prosecute Jeffrey Epstein and
his co-conspirators is not a Republican
issue or a Democrat issue. It's a moral
issue that hints at the institutional
rot in our justice system that spans
decades and administrations.
History shows that press freedom is
vulnerable under leadership of any
stripe. While attacks on the press have
risen by 25% this year, a look at the
data from the US Press Freedom Tracker
reveals that the highest number of
journalists arrested or assaulted in
recent history actually occurred in
2020. These incidents were largely
linked to the civil unrest surrounding
the BLM protests and the enforcement of
pandemic restrictions. These protests
were concentrated in cities and states
governed by Democrats. And so it's no
surprise that with a spike in violence
in these states, there was also a spike
in violence against journalists. This
shows that the urge to suppress
uncomfortable press coverage is not
unique to one political party. It's a
reflex of power that manifests whenever
the streets or the internet become too
noisy. This is why the Epstein case is
so critical. It unites the public
against that oppressive reflex. The
legislative push to release the Epstein
files enjoyed rare bipartisan support.
Congress voted almost unanimously to
bring these documents to light. Only one
lawmaker voted against the release. The
frustration about how this case is being
dealt with is not limited to Washington
either. At a recent Turning Point USA
event, a gathering of the MAGA faithful,
Laura Ingram asked the audience to clap
if they were satisfied with the results
of the Epstein investigation.
>> How many of you are satisfied? You can
you can clap.
Satisfied with the results of the
Epstein investigation. Clap.
[Music]
Okay, I told you to clap. You guys
aren't listening.
>> People of all political persuasions get
what the algorithm seems to be missing,
that the Epstein story is a moral
scandal about a two-tier justice system,
not a political football. This shared
outrage makes the unsafe categorization
by YouTube even more baffling. The
public is united in wanting to know why,
for example, current FBI director Cash
Patel claimed that there were no
perpetrators other than Epstein when the
released files indicate that the FBI
identified 10 potential co-conspirators.
They want to know why Patel claimed to
have seen footage proving nothing
untoward happened in Epstein's cell only
to release a video recorded in a
different part of the cell block with a
critical minute of footage conspicuously
missing due to a glitch. Covering these
discrepancies is not hate speech or
harassment. It's the basic function of a
free press. When smaller channels see my
video get demonetized, they're likely to
take notice. If you're running a small
channel and relying on advertising
checks to pay your rent, the signal sent
by demonetization would be clear. Don't
touch this topic. Stick to gaming. Stick
to drama. Leave the questioning of
authority to the professionals at news
organizations who are currently too
frightened to actually do it. A finer,
bitter irony defines this whole
experience. The algorithm can quickly
flag my video as advertiser unfriendly.
Yet, it fails to police actual fraud. In
recent weeks, my likeness has been used
here on YouTube in deep fake videos
promoting scams. When I first
encountered algorithmic stable coin
proposals in the late 20110s, my initial
reaction was the same one I have
whenever cryptocurrency developers
announced they've solved fundamental
monetary problems. Despite my repeated
reports, YouTube has been slow to remove
these impersonations. We're left with a
system that penalizes journalism for
being too serious while dragging its
feet on removing AI generated fakes. The
yellow demonetization icon offers one
positive aspect, and that is
transparency. Being notified of
demonetization is preferable to being
silently throttled in the background, a
practice known as shadow banning. At
least I am told when I've been censored,
even if the reasoning remains vague. In
other parts of the world, censorship is
a much more frightening event. Here,
it's not a knock at the door, but a
quiet algorithmic nudge. It's less
dramatic, but in the long run, it may be
just as effective at narrowing the
public discourse. My plan is to continue
covering the topics I find interesting
and that I think my viewers will find
interesting too. Whether the videos are
monetized or not, but for the broader
ecosystem, this algorithmic censorship
is worth worrying about. It forces us to
ask what YouTube wants to be. If the
platform's incentives aggressively
filter out the boring work of holding
power to account, the deep dives, the
legal analysis, the historical context,
then it ceases to be a digital public
square. It risks becoming a place solely
for childish entertainment, safe for
advertisers, but useless for democracy.
If you want to watch my demonetized
video, here's a link. The great thing is
that you can watch it without adverts.
Our sponsors keep the channel going. So
if you're traveling soon, don't forget
to check out our sponsor SY using the
link in the description. Have a great
day and talk to you again soon. Bye.
[Music]